docs/014-storage/002-emptyDir.md, before:

---
// filepath: /Users/anveshmuppeda/Desktop/anvesh/tech/git/kubernetes/docs/014-storage/002-emptyDir.md
title: "Empty Directory (emptyDir)"
description: "Understanding Ephemeral Storage in Kubernetes with emptyDir"
sidebar_label: "Empty Directory (emptyDir)"
sidebar_id: "empty-dir"
sidebar_position: 1
---  

# Kubernetes Ephemeral Volumes: A Practical Guide to `emptyDir` Volumes

In the world of Kubernetes storage, not every solution needs to be a complex, persistent, network-attached disk. Sometimes, all your application needs is a simple, temporary place to store files. This is where the fundamental `emptyDir` volume shines.

This guide will walk you through what `emptyDir` is, its key characteristics, and practical, hands-on examples to get you started.

## What is an `emptyDir` Volume?

An `emptyDir` volume is a temporary directory that is created for a Pod when it is scheduled on a worker node. As its name suggests, it starts empty. All containers within the same Pod can read from and write to the same `emptyDir` volume, making it an excellent mechanism for sharing data between them.

The crucial thing to remember about `emptyDir` is its **ephemeral nature**. Its lifecycle is tied directly to the lifecycle of the Pod itself.

## Key Characteristics

1.  **Tied to Pod Lifetime**: When a Pod is created, the `emptyDir` is created. When the Pod is deleted (for any reason), the data in the `emptyDir` is permanently lost.
2.  **Shared Within a Pod**: All containers in a Pod can share the same `emptyDir` volume. They just need to mount it at the same or different paths.
3.  **Survives Container Restarts**: If a container crashes and restarts, the data in the `emptyDir` volume **persists**. This is a key feature that makes it more useful than just writing to a container's own filesystem, which is lost on restart.
4.  **Node-Local**: The physical storage for an `emptyDir` is located on the specific worker node where the Pod is running. This means a Pod cannot be moved to another node and retain its `emptyDir` data.
5.  **Disk or Memory-Backed**: By default, `emptyDir` volumes are backed by the node's primary storage (the disk that holds the kubelet's files). You can also configure it to be backed by RAM for higher performance.

***

## Hands-On Examples

Let's dive into some practical use cases to see `emptyDir` in action.

### Use Case 1: Simple Scratch Space

This is the most common use case: an application needs a temporary directory to store files during its execution, like for processing data or caching assets.

#### Step 1: Create the Pod Manifest

Create a file named `pod-emptydir.yaml`. This Pod has a single container that writes the current date to a file every 5 seconds.

```yaml
# pod-emptydir.yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: scratch-space-pod
spec:
  containers:
  - name: main-app
    image: busybox
    # This command writes the date to a log file in the cache directory every 5 seconds
    command: ["/bin/sh", "-c", "while true; do date >> /cache/log.txt; sleep 5; done"]
    volumeMounts:
    - name: cache-volume  # This name must match the volume name below
      mountPath: /cache    # The path where the volume will be mounted inside the container
  volumes:
  - name: cache-volume      # A unique name for the volume within this Pod
    emptyDir: {}         # The type of volume is emptyDir
```

#### Step 2: Deploy and Verify

1.  **Deploy the Pod:**
    ```bash
    kubectl apply -f pod-emptydir.yaml
    ```

2.  **Check the data:** Wait a few moments, then `exec` into the Pod to see the contents of the file.
    ```bash
    # Get a shell inside the running container
    kubectl exec -it scratch-space-pod -- /bin/sh

    # Inside the container, view the log file
    / # cat /cache/log.txt
    Sun Jun  8 15:15:05 UTC 2025
    Sun Jun  8 15:15:10 UTC 2025
    Sun Jun  8 15:15:15 UTC 2025

    # Exit the container
    / # exit
    ```

3.  **Clean up:** Now, delete the Pod and see what happens.
    ```bash
    kubectl delete pod scratch-space-pod
    ```
    The Pod is gone, and the `/cache/log.txt` file, along with the entire `emptyDir` volume, has been permanently deleted from the worker node.

### Use Case 2: Sharing Data Between Containers

This example demonstrates how two containers in the same Pod can communicate using a shared `emptyDir` volume. One container will act as a "producer," writing data, and the other will be a "consumer," reading that data.

#### Step 1: Create the Pod Manifest

Create a file named `pod-shared.yaml`.

```yaml
# pod-shared.yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: shared-data-pod
spec:
  # This container writes "Hello from the producer!" into index.html
  containers:
  - name: producer
    image: busybox
    command: ["/bin/sh", "-c", "echo 'Hello from the producer!' > /workdir/index.html && sleep 3600"]
    volumeMounts:
    - name: shared-workdir
      mountPath: /workdir

  # This container acts like a web server, serving the file written by the producer
  - name: consumer
    image: nginx:alpine
    volumeMounts:
    - name: shared-workdir
      mountPath: /usr/share/nginx/html # Mount the shared volume into nginx's web root
      readOnly: true                  # Good practice: the consumer only needs to read

  volumes:
  - name: shared-workdir
    emptyDir: {}
```

#### Step 2: Deploy and Verify

1.  **Deploy the Pod:**
    ```bash
    kubectl apply -f pod-shared.yaml
    ```

2.  **Verify the consumer can see the data:** We can `exec` into the `consumer` container (the NGINX server) and use `curl` to request the file that the `producer` created.

    ```bash
    # Get a shell inside the 'consumer' container
    kubectl exec -it shared-data-pod -c consumer -- /bin/sh

    # Inside the container, use curl to access the web server locally
    / # curl http://localhost/index.html
    Hello from the producer!

    # Exit the container
    / # exit
    ```
This works perfectly! The `producer` wrote a file into the shared `emptyDir`, and the `consumer` was able to immediately read and serve it, demonstrating seamless data sharing within the Pod.

***

## Advanced: Using Memory as a Backend

For performance-sensitive applications, like a high-speed cache, writing to disk can be a bottleneck. You can instruct Kubernetes to create the `emptyDir` as a `tmpfs` volume, which is backed by the node's RAM instead of its disk.

**Warning:** Using memory for your `emptyDir` counts against your container's memory limit. If you fill up the `tmpfs` volume, you risk the container being OOMKilled (Out Of Memory).

#### Example Manifest with `medium: Memory`

```yaml
# pod-memory.yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: memory-backed-pod
spec:
  containers:
  - name: fast-cache-app
    image: busybox
    command: ["/bin/sh", "-c", "sleep 3600"]
    volumeMounts:
    - name: cache-in-ram
      mountPath: /fast-cache
  volumes:
  - name: cache-in-ram
    emptyDir:
      medium: Memory # This is the key change
      sizeLimit: 256Mi # It's wise to set a size limit
```

When you deploy this Pod, the `/fast-cache` directory will be a RAM-backed filesystem, offering significantly higher I/O performance than the default disk-backed option.

## When to Use `emptyDir` (and When Not To)

✅ **Use `emptyDir` for:**
* Temporary scratch space for data processing.
* Caching frequently accessed data.
* Sharing files and configuration between containers in a single Pod.
* A holding area for long-running computations that can survive a container restart.

❌ **Do NOT use `emptyDir` for:**
* Storing persistent application data like databases or user uploads.
* Sharing data between different Pods.
* Any data that you cannot afford to lose when a Pod is rescheduled to a different node.

For those use cases, you should use **PersistentVolumes**. But for simple, ephemeral storage needs, `emptyDir` is a powerful, efficient, and easy-to-use tool in your Kubernetes arsenal.

Commit message:

feat: Add manifest templates and tips for creating Kubernetes resources in documentation

docs/014-storage/002-emptyDir.md, after:

---
// filepath: /Users/anveshmuppeda/Desktop/anvesh/tech/git/kubernetes/docs/014-storage/002-emptyDir.md
title: "Empty Directory (emptyDir)"
description: "Understanding Ephemeral Storage in Kubernetes with emptyDir"
sidebar_label: "Empty Directory (emptyDir)"
sidebar_id: "empty-dir"
sidebar_position: 1
---  

# Kubernetes Ephemeral Volumes: A Practical Guide to `emptyDir` Volumes

:::tip
Use the [manifest templates](https://github.com/anveshmuppeda/kubernetes/tree/feature/docs_update/docs/014-storage/manifests) to create your own Kubernetes resources which can be used in the examples below.
:::

In the world of Kubernetes storage, not every solution needs to be a complex, persistent, network-attached disk. Sometimes, all your application needs is a simple, temporary place to store files. This is where the fundamental `emptyDir` volume shines.

This guide will walk you through what `emptyDir` is, its key characteristics, and practical, hands-on examples to get you started.

## What is an `emptyDir` Volume?

An `emptyDir` volume is a temporary directory that is created for a Pod when it is scheduled on a worker node. As its name suggests, it starts empty. All containers within the same Pod can read from and write to the same `emptyDir` volume, making it an excellent mechanism for sharing data between them.

The crucial thing to remember about `emptyDir` is its **ephemeral nature**. Its lifecycle is tied directly to the lifecycle of the Pod itself.

## Key Characteristics

1.  **Tied to Pod Lifetime**: When a Pod is created, the `emptyDir` is created. When the Pod is deleted (for any reason), the data in the `emptyDir` is permanently lost.
2.  **Shared Within a Pod**: All containers in a Pod can share the same `emptyDir` volume. They just need to mount it at the same or different paths.
3.  **Survives Container Restarts**: If a container crashes and restarts, the data in the `emptyDir` volume **persists**. This is a key feature that makes it more useful than just writing to a container's own filesystem, which is lost on restart.
4.  **Node-Local**: The physical storage for an `emptyDir` is located on the specific worker node where the Pod is running. This means a Pod cannot be moved to another node and retain its `emptyDir` data.
5.  **Disk or Memory-Backed**: By default, `emptyDir` volumes are backed by the node's primary storage (the disk that holds the kubelet's files). You can also configure it to be backed by RAM for higher performance.

***

## Hands-On Examples

Let's dive into some practical use cases to see `emptyDir` in action.

### Use Case 1: Simple Scratch Space

This is the most common use case: an application needs a temporary directory to store files during its execution, like for processing data or caching assets.

#### Step 1: Create the Pod Manifest

Create a file named `pod-emptydir.yaml`. This Pod has a single container that writes the current date to a file every 5 seconds.

```yaml
# pod-emptydir.yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: scratch-space-pod
spec:
  containers:
  - name: main-app
    image: busybox
    # This command writes the date to a log file in the cache directory every 5 seconds
    command: ["/bin/sh", "-c", "while true; do date >> /cache/log.txt; sleep 5; done"]
    volumeMounts:
    - name: cache-volume  # This name must match the volume name below
      mountPath: /cache    # The path where the volume will be mounted inside the container
  volumes:
  - name: cache-volume      # A unique name for the volume within this Pod
    emptyDir: {}         # The type of volume is emptyDir
```

#### Step 2: Deploy and Verify

1.  **Deploy the Pod:**
    ```bash
    kubectl apply -f pod-emptydir.yaml
    ```

2.  **Check the data:** Wait a few moments, then `exec` into the Pod to see the contents of the file.
    ```bash
    # Get a shell inside the running container
    kubectl exec -it scratch-space-pod -- /bin/sh

    # Inside the container, view the log file
    / # cat /cache/log.txt
    Sun Jun  8 15:15:05 UTC 2025
    Sun Jun  8 15:15:10 UTC 2025
    Sun Jun  8 15:15:15 UTC 2025

    # Exit the container
    / # exit
    ```

3.  **Clean up:** Now, delete the Pod and see what happens.
    ```bash
    kubectl delete pod scratch-space-pod
    ```
    The Pod is gone, and the `/cache/log.txt` file, along with the entire `emptyDir` volume, has been permanently deleted from the worker node.

### Use Case 2: Sharing Data Between Containers

This example demonstrates how two containers in the same Pod can communicate using a shared `emptyDir` volume. One container will act as a "producer," writing data, and the other will be a "consumer," reading that data.

#### Step 1: Create the Pod Manifest

Create a file named `pod-shared.yaml`.

```yaml
# pod-shared.yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: shared-data-pod
spec:
  # This container writes "Hello from the producer!" into index.html
  containers:
  - name: producer
    image: busybox
    command: ["/bin/sh", "-c", "echo 'Hello from the producer!' > /workdir/index.html && sleep 3600"]
    volumeMounts:
    - name: shared-workdir
      mountPath: /workdir

  # This container acts like a web server, serving the file written by the producer
  - name: consumer
    image: nginx:alpine
    volumeMounts:
    - name: shared-workdir
      mountPath: /usr/share/nginx/html # Mount the shared volume into nginx's web root
      readOnly: true                  # Good practice: the consumer only needs to read

  volumes:
  - name: shared-workdir
    emptyDir: {}
```

#### Step 2: Deploy and Verify

1.  **Deploy the Pod:**
    ```bash
    kubectl apply -f pod-shared.yaml
    ```

2.  **Verify the consumer can see the data:** We can `exec` into the `consumer` container (the NGINX server) and use `curl` to request the file that the `producer` created.

    ```bash
    # Get a shell inside the 'consumer' container
    kubectl exec -it shared-data-pod -c consumer -- /bin/sh

    # Inside the container, use curl to access the web server locally
    / # curl http://localhost/index.html
    Hello from the producer!

    # Exit the container
    / # exit
    ```
This works perfectly! The `producer` wrote a file into the shared `emptyDir`, and the `consumer` was able to immediately read and serve it, demonstrating seamless data sharing within the Pod.

***

## Advanced: Using Memory as a Backend

For performance-sensitive applications, like a high-speed cache, writing to disk can be a bottleneck. You can instruct Kubernetes to create the `emptyDir` as a `tmpfs` volume, which is backed by the node's RAM instead of its disk.

**Warning:** Using memory for your `emptyDir` counts against your container's memory limit. If you fill up the `tmpfs` volume, you risk the container being OOMKilled (Out Of Memory).

#### Example Manifest with `medium: Memory`

```yaml
# pod-memory.yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: memory-backed-pod
spec:
  containers:
  - name: fast-cache-app
    image: busybox
    command: ["/bin/sh", "-c", "sleep 3600"]
    volumeMounts:
    - name: cache-in-ram
      mountPath: /fast-cache
  volumes:
  - name: cache-in-ram
    emptyDir:
      medium: Memory # This is the key change
      sizeLimit: 256Mi # It's wise to set a size limit
```

When you deploy this Pod, the `/fast-cache` directory will be a RAM-backed filesystem, offering significantly higher I/O performance than the default disk-backed option.

## When to Use `emptyDir` (and When Not To)

✅ **Use `emptyDir` for:**
* Temporary scratch space for data processing.
* Caching frequently accessed data.
* Sharing files and configuration between containers in a single Pod.
* A holding area for long-running computations that can survive a container restart.

❌ **Do NOT use `emptyDir` for:**
* Storing persistent application data like databases or user uploads.
* Sharing data between different Pods.
* Any data that you cannot afford to lose when a Pod is rescheduled to a different node.

For those use cases, you should use **PersistentVolumes**. But for simple, ephemeral storage needs, `emptyDir` is a powerful, efficient, and easy-to-use tool in your Kubernetes arsenal.
