docs/eks-guides/012-eks-s3-csi-driver.md, before:

---
// filepath: /Users/anveshmuppeda/Desktop/anvesh/tech/git/kubernetes/docs/eks/010-eks-s3-csi-driver.md
sidebar_label: "EKS Mountpoint with S3 CSI Driver"
sidebar_position: 12
---  

# EKS Mountpoint for Amazon S3 CSI Driver: Complete Implementation Guide

## Overview

The Mountpoint for Amazon S3 Container Storage Interface (CSI) driver enables Kubernetes applications to access Amazon S3 objects through a standard file system interface. This integration allows containers running in Amazon EKS and self-managed Kubernetes clusters to interact with S3 buckets as mounted volumes, achieving high aggregate throughput without requiring application code modifications.

Built on the foundation of Mountpoint for Amazon S3, this CSI driver seamlessly bridges the gap between object storage and traditional file system operations, making S3 accessible to applications that expect POSIX-like file operations.

## Key Features

- **High Performance**: Optimized for high aggregate throughput workloads
- **Zero Code Changes**: Applications can use S3 without modification
- **Native Integration**: Seamless integration with Kubernetes storage primitives
- **Static Provisioning**: Works with existing S3 buckets
- **Multi-Mount Support**: ReadWriteMany and ReadOnlyMany access modes

## Prerequisites

Before implementing the Mountpoint S3 CSI driver, ensure you have:

1. **EKS Cluster**: A running Amazon EKS cluster
2. **IAM OIDC Provider**: An existing AWS Identity and Access Management (IAM) OpenID Connect (OIDC) provider for your cluster
3. **AWS CLI**: Version 2.12.3 or later installed and configured
4. **kubectl**: Command-line tool installed (version compatible with your cluster)
5. **S3 Buckets**: Pre-existing S3 buckets for static provisioning

## Important Considerations and Limitations

### Platform Compatibility
- **Windows Containers**: Not supported with Windows-based container images
- **EKS Hybrid Nodes**: Not compatible with Amazon EKS Hybrid Nodes
- **AWS Fargate**: Not supported on Fargate (EC2-based containers only)

### Provisioning Limitations
- **Static Provisioning Only**: Dynamic provisioning and automatic bucket creation are not supported
- **Existing Buckets Required**: You must specify an existing S3 bucket in the `bucketName` field

### File System Behavior
- **Limited POSIX Support**: Not all POSIX file system features are available
- **Performance Characteristics**: Optimized for throughput rather than low-latency operations

## Implementation Steps

### Step 1: Create IAM Role and Service Account

The Mountpoint S3 CSI driver requires specific IAM permissions to interact with S3 buckets. Create an IAM role with the necessary permissions:

#### Using eksctl (Recommended)

```bash
# Set environment variables
export CLUSTER_NAME=my-cluster
export REGION=us-west-2
export ROLE_NAME=AmazonEKS_S3_CSI_DriverRole
export POLICY_ARN=arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonS3FullAccess

# Create IAM service account with attached policy
eksctl create iamserviceaccount \
    --name s3-csi-driver-sa \
    --namespace kube-system \
    --cluster $CLUSTER_NAME \
    --attach-policy-arn $POLICY_ARN \
    --approve \
    --role-name $ROLE_NAME \
    --region $REGION \
    --role-only
```

#### Custom IAM Policy (Production Recommended)

For production environments, create a custom IAM policy with minimum required permissions:

```json
{
    "Version": "2012-10-17",
    "Statement": [
        {
            "Effect": "Allow",
            "Action": [
                "s3:GetObject",
                "s3:PutObject",
                "s3:DeleteObject",
                "s3:ListBucket"
            ],
            "Resource": [
                "arn:aws:s3:::your-bucket-name",
                "arn:aws:s3:::your-bucket-name/*"
            ]
        }
    ]
}
```

### Step 2: Install the Mountpoint S3 CSI Driver

Install the driver as an Amazon EKS add-on using the AWS CLI:

```bash
# Replace with your actual values
export CLUSTER_NAME=my-cluster
export ACCOUNT_ID=111122223333
export ROLE_NAME=AmazonEKS_S3_CSI_DriverRole

# Install the add-on
aws eks create-addon \
    --cluster-name $CLUSTER_NAME \
    --addon-name aws-mountpoint-s3-csi-driver \
    --service-account-role-arn arn:aws:iam::$ACCOUNT_ID:role/$ROLE_NAME
```

#### Verify Installation

```bash
# Check add-on status
aws eks describe-addon \
    --cluster-name $CLUSTER_NAME \
    --addon-name aws-mountpoint-s3-csi-driver

# Verify driver pods are running
kubectl get pods -n kube-system | grep s3-csi
```

## Practical Implementation Examples

### Example 1: Basic Static Provisioning

This example demonstrates mounting a single S3 bucket to a pod:  
static_provisioning.yaml 

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolume
metadata:
  name: s3-pv
spec:
  capacity:
    storage: 1200Gi # Required but ignored for S3
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteMany # Supports ReadWriteMany/ReadOnlyMany
  storageClassName: "" # Required for static provisioning
  claimRef:
    namespace: default
    name: s3-pvc
  mountOptions:
    - allow-delete
    - region us-east-1
    - prefix some-s3-prefix/ # Optional: mount specific prefix
  csi:
    driver: s3.csi.aws.com
    volumeHandle: s3-csi-driver-volume # Must be unique
    volumeAttributes:
      bucketName: mountpoint-s3-csi-driver-testing-bucket # Replace with your bucket name
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: s3-pvc
spec:
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteMany
  storageClassName: ""
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 1200Gi # Required but ignored
  volumeName: s3-pv
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: s3-app
spec:
  containers:
    - name: app
      image: ubuntu
      command: ["/bin/sh"]
      args: 
        - "-c"
        - "echo 'Hello from the container!' >> /data/$(date -u).txt; tail -f /dev/null"
      volumeMounts:
        - name: persistent-storage
          mountPath: /data
  volumes:
    - name: persistent-storage
      persistentVolumeClaim:
        claimName: s3-pvc
```

**Deploy and Verify:**

```bash
# Deploy the resources
kubectl apply -f static_provisioning.yaml

# Verify deployment
kubectl get pv,pvc,pods

# Check if file was created in S3
> aws s3 ls s3://mountpoint-s3-csi-driver-testing-bucket/some-s3-prefix/
2025-06-01 16:13:25         26 Sun Jun  1 21:13:24 UTC 2025.txt

# Cleanup
kubectl delete -f static_provisioning.yaml
```

![Static Provisioning Example](./img/s3-static_provisioning.png)

### Example 2: Multiple S3 Buckets in One Pod

This example shows how to mount multiple S3 buckets to a single pod:  
multiple_buckets_one_pod.yaml 

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolume
metadata:
  name: s3-pv-bucket1
spec:
  capacity:
    storage: 1200Gi
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteMany
  storageClassName: ""
  claimRef:
    namespace: default
    name: s3-pvc-bucket1
  mountOptions:
    - allow-delete
    - region us-west-2
  csi:
    driver: s3.csi.aws.com
    volumeHandle: s3-csi-driver-volume-1
    volumeAttributes:
      bucketName: mountpoint-s3-csi-driver-testing-bucket-1 # Replace with your bucket name
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: s3-pvc-bucket1
spec:
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteMany
  storageClassName: ""
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 1200Gi
  volumeName: s3-pv-bucket1
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolume
metadata:
  name: s3-pv-bucket2
spec:
  capacity:
    storage: 1200Gi
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteMany
  storageClassName: ""
  claimRef:
    namespace: default
    name: s3-pvc-bucket2
  mountOptions:
    - allow-delete
    - region us-west-2
  csi:
    driver: s3.csi.aws.com
    volumeHandle: s3-csi-driver-volume-2
    volumeAttributes:
      bucketName: mountpoint-s3-csi-driver-testing-bucket-2 # Replace with your bucket name
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: s3-pvc-bucket2
spec:
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteMany
  storageClassName: ""
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 1200Gi
  volumeName: s3-pv-bucket2
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: s3-multi-bucket-app
spec:
  containers:
    - name: app
      image: ubuntu
      command: ["/bin/sh"]
      args:
        - "-c"
        - |
          echo 'Data for bucket 1' >> /data1/$(date -u).txt
          echo 'Data for bucket 2' >> /data2/$(date -u).txt
          tail -f /dev/null
      volumeMounts:
        - name: storage-bucket1
          mountPath: /data1
        - name: storage-bucket2
          mountPath: /data2
  volumes:
    - name: storage-bucket1
      persistentVolumeClaim:
        claimName: s3-pvc-bucket1
    - name: storage-bucket2
      persistentVolumeClaim:
        claimName: s3-pvc-bucket2
```

#### Bucket 1 
![Multiple Buckets Example](./img/s3-multiple_buckets_one_pod1.png)
#### Bucket 2
![Multiple Buckets Example](./img/s3-multiple_buckets_one_pod2.png)

### Example 3: Shared Storage Across Multiple Pods

This example demonstrates multiple pods sharing the same S3 bucket:  
multiple_pods_one_bucket.yaml 
```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolume
metadata:
  name: s3-shared-pv
spec:
  capacity:
    storage: 1200Gi
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteMany
  storageClassName: ""
  claimRef:
    namespace: default
    name: s3-shared-pvc
  mountOptions:
    - allow-delete
    - region us-east-1
  csi:
    driver: s3.csi.aws.com
    volumeHandle: s3-shared-volume
    volumeAttributes:
      bucketName: mountpoint-s3-csi-driver-testing-bucket # Replace with your bucket name
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: s3-shared-pvc
spec:
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteMany
  storageClassName: ""
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 1200Gi
  volumeName: s3-shared-pv
---
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: s3-shared-app
  labels:
    app: s3-shared-app
spec:
  replicas: 3
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: s3-shared-app
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: s3-shared-app
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: s3-app
        image: ubuntu
        command: ["/bin/sh"]
        args:
          - "-c"
          - |
            POD_NAME=$(hostname)
            echo "Hello from pod $POD_NAME at $(date -u)" >> /data/$POD_NAME-$(date -u).txt
            tail -f /dev/null
        volumeMounts:
        - name: shared-storage
          mountPath: /data
        ports:
        - containerPort: 80
      volumes:
      - name: shared-storage
        persistentVolumeClaim:
          claimName: s3-shared-pvc
```

#### Shared Storage Across Multiple Pods Example
![Shared Storage Example](./img/s3-multiple_pods_one_bucket.png)


## Configuration Options and Mount Options

### Available Mount Options

- `allow-delete`: Allows deletion of objects
- `region <region>`: Specify AWS region
- `prefix <prefix>`: Mount only objects with specific prefix
- `uid <uid>`: Set file owner UID
- `gid <gid>`: Set file owner GID
- `allow-overwrite`: Allow overwriting existing files

### Performance Tuning

```yaml
mountOptions:
  - allow-delete
  - region us-west-2
  - prefix data/
  - cache /tmp/mountpoint-cache
  - max-threads 16
```

## Monitoring and Troubleshooting

### Common Commands for Troubleshooting

```bash
# Check driver status
kubectl get pods -n kube-system | grep s3-csi

# View driver logs
kubectl logs -n kube-system -l app=s3-csi-node

# Describe PV/PVC for issues
kubectl describe pv s3-pv
kubectl describe pvc s3-pvc

# Check mount status inside pod
kubectl exec -it <pod-name> -- df -h
kubectl exec -it <pod-name> -- mount | grep s3
```

### Common Issues and Solutions

1. **Permission Denied**: Verify IAM role has correct S3 permissions
2. **Mount Timeout**: Check region configuration and network connectivity
3. **Bucket Not Found**: Ensure bucket exists and is accessible from the cluster region

## Use Cases and Benefits

### Ideal Use Cases

- **Data Analytics**: Large-scale data processing workloads
- **Machine Learning**: Training data access and model storage
- **Content Distribution**: Serving static content from S3
- **Backup and Archive**: Application data backup to S3
- **Log Aggregation**: Centralized logging to S3

### Key Benefits

- **Cost Effective**: Leverage S3's cost-effective storage tiers
- **Scalability**: Virtually unlimited storage capacity
- **Durability**: 99.999999999% (11 9's) durability
- **Integration**: Native Kubernetes storage integration
- **Performance**: Optimized for high-throughput workloads

## Security Best Practices

### IAM Policy Recommendations

1. **Principle of Least Privilege**: Grant only necessary permissions
2. **Bucket-Specific Policies**: Limit access to specific buckets
3. **Regular Audits**: Review and rotate IAM roles periodically

### Network Security

```yaml
# Example network policy for pod-to-S3 communication
apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: NetworkPolicy
metadata:
  name: s3-app-network-policy
spec:
  podSelector:
    matchLabels:
      app: s3-app
  policyTypes:
  - Egress
  egress:
  - to: []
    ports:
    - protocol: TCP
      port: 443
```

## Advanced Configuration

### Custom Storage Classes

```yaml
apiVersion: storage.k8s.io/v1
kind: StorageClass
metadata:
  name: s3-csi-storage
provisioner: s3.csi.aws.com
parameters:
  bucketName: my-s3-bucket
  region: us-west-2
mountOptions:
  - allow-delete
  - cache /tmp/s3-cache
```

### Pod Security Context

```yaml
spec:
  securityContext:
    fsGroup: 2000
    runAsUser: 1000
    runAsGroup: 3000
  containers:
  - name: app
    securityContext:
      allowPrivilegeEscalation: false
      readOnlyRootFilesystem: true
```

## Cleanup and Maintenance

### Removing the Driver

```bash
# Remove the EKS add-on
aws eks delete-addon \
    --cluster-name $CLUSTER_NAME \
    --addon-name aws-mountpoint-s3-csi-driver

# Clean up IAM resources
eksctl delete iamserviceaccount \
    --name s3-csi-driver-sa \
    --namespace kube-system \
    --cluster $CLUSTER_NAME
```

### Maintenance Tasks

1. **Regular Updates**: Keep the driver updated to latest version
2. **Monitoring**: Monitor S3 costs and usage patterns
3. **Performance Review**: Regularly assess performance metrics
4. **Security Audits**: Review IAM permissions and access patterns

## Additional Resources

- [Mountpoint for Amazon S3 CSI Driver GitHub Repository](https://github.com/awslabs/mountpoint-s3-csi-driver)
- [Official AWS Documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/s3-csi.html)
- [Mountpoint for Amazon S3 Documentation](https://github.com/awslabs/mountpoint-s3)
- [Kubernetes CSI Documentation](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/)
- [AWS EKS Best Practices Guide](https://aws.github.io/aws-eks-best-practices/)

## Conclusion

The Mountpoint for Amazon S3 CSI driver provides a powerful solution for integrating S3 storage with Kubernetes workloads. By following this comprehensive guide, you can successfully implement, configure, and manage S3-backed persistent volumes in your EKS environment while maintaining security best practices and optimal performance.

Commit message:

Add note about using CloudFormation template for EKS cluster setup with S3 CSI Driver

docs/eks-guides/012-eks-s3-csi-driver.md, after:

---
// filepath: /Users/anveshmuppeda/Desktop/anvesh/tech/git/kubernetes/docs/eks/010-eks-s3-csi-driver.md
sidebar_label: "EKS Mountpoint with S3 CSI Driver"
sidebar_position: 12
---  

# EKS Mountpoint for Amazon S3 CSI Driver: Complete Implementation Guide

## Overview

The Mountpoint for Amazon S3 Container Storage Interface (CSI) driver enables Kubernetes applications to access Amazon S3 objects through a standard file system interface. This integration allows containers running in Amazon EKS and self-managed Kubernetes clusters to interact with S3 buckets as mounted volumes, achieving high aggregate throughput without requiring application code modifications.

Built on the foundation of Mountpoint for Amazon S3, this CSI driver seamlessly bridges the gap between object storage and traditional file system operations, making S3 accessible to applications that expect POSIX-like file operations.

## Key Features

- **High Performance**: Optimized for high aggregate throughput workloads
- **Zero Code Changes**: Applications can use S3 without modification
- **Native Integration**: Seamless integration with Kubernetes storage primitives
- **Static Provisioning**: Works with existing S3 buckets
- **Multi-Mount Support**: ReadWriteMany and ReadOnlyMany access modes

## Prerequisites

Before implementing the Mountpoint S3 CSI driver, ensure you have:

1. **EKS Cluster**: A running Amazon EKS cluster
2. **IAM OIDC Provider**: An existing AWS Identity and Access Management (IAM) OpenID Connect (OIDC) provider for your cluster
3. **AWS CLI**: Version 2.12.3 or later installed and configured
4. **kubectl**: Command-line tool installed (version compatible with your cluster)
5. **S3 Buckets**: Pre-existing S3 buckets for static provisioning

## Important Considerations and Limitations

### Platform Compatibility
- **Windows Containers**: Not supported with Windows-based container images
- **EKS Hybrid Nodes**: Not compatible with Amazon EKS Hybrid Nodes
- **AWS Fargate**: Not supported on Fargate (EC2-based containers only)

### Provisioning Limitations
- **Static Provisioning Only**: Dynamic provisioning and automatic bucket creation are not supported
- **Existing Buckets Required**: You must specify an existing S3 bucket in the `bucketName` field

### File System Behavior
- **Limited POSIX Support**: Not all POSIX file system features are available
- **Performance Characteristics**: Optimized for throughput rather than low-latency operations

## Implementation Steps

> **Note:**  
> Use this CloudFormation template `./cloudformation/eks-s3-driver-setup.yaml`  
> to create an EKS cluster including the Mountpoint S3 CSI Driver setup.

### Step 1: Create IAM Role and Service Account

The Mountpoint S3 CSI driver requires specific IAM permissions to interact with S3 buckets. Create an IAM role with the necessary permissions:

#### Using eksctl (Recommended)

```bash
# Set environment variables
export CLUSTER_NAME=my-cluster
export REGION=us-west-2
export ROLE_NAME=AmazonEKS_S3_CSI_DriverRole
export POLICY_ARN=arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonS3FullAccess

# Create IAM service account with attached policy
eksctl create iamserviceaccount \
    --name s3-csi-driver-sa \
    --namespace kube-system \
    --cluster $CLUSTER_NAME \
    --attach-policy-arn $POLICY_ARN \
    --approve \
    --role-name $ROLE_NAME \
    --region $REGION \
    --role-only
```

#### Custom IAM Policy (Production Recommended)

For production environments, create a custom IAM policy with minimum required permissions:

```json
{
    "Version": "2012-10-17",
    "Statement": [
        {
            "Effect": "Allow",
            "Action": [
                "s3:GetObject",
                "s3:PutObject",
                "s3:DeleteObject",
                "s3:ListBucket"
            ],
            "Resource": [
                "arn:aws:s3:::your-bucket-name",
                "arn:aws:s3:::your-bucket-name/*"
            ]
        }
    ]
}
```

### Step 2: Install the Mountpoint S3 CSI Driver

Install the driver as an Amazon EKS add-on using the AWS CLI:

```bash
# Replace with your actual values
export CLUSTER_NAME=my-cluster
export ACCOUNT_ID=111122223333
export ROLE_NAME=AmazonEKS_S3_CSI_DriverRole

# Install the add-on
aws eks create-addon \
    --cluster-name $CLUSTER_NAME \
    --addon-name aws-mountpoint-s3-csi-driver \
    --service-account-role-arn arn:aws:iam::$ACCOUNT_ID:role/$ROLE_NAME
```

#### Verify Installation

```bash
# Check add-on status
aws eks describe-addon \
    --cluster-name $CLUSTER_NAME \
    --addon-name aws-mountpoint-s3-csi-driver

# Verify driver pods are running
kubectl get pods -n kube-system | grep s3-csi
```

## Practical Implementation Examples

### Example 1: Basic Static Provisioning

This example demonstrates mounting a single S3 bucket to a pod:  
static_provisioning.yaml 

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolume
metadata:
  name: s3-pv
spec:
  capacity:
    storage: 1200Gi # Required but ignored for S3
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteMany # Supports ReadWriteMany/ReadOnlyMany
  storageClassName: "" # Required for static provisioning
  claimRef:
    namespace: default
    name: s3-pvc
  mountOptions:
    - allow-delete
    - region us-east-1
    - prefix some-s3-prefix/ # Optional: mount specific prefix
  csi:
    driver: s3.csi.aws.com
    volumeHandle: s3-csi-driver-volume # Must be unique
    volumeAttributes:
      bucketName: mountpoint-s3-csi-driver-testing-bucket # Replace with your bucket name
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: s3-pvc
spec:
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteMany
  storageClassName: ""
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 1200Gi # Required but ignored
  volumeName: s3-pv
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: s3-app
spec:
  containers:
    - name: app
      image: ubuntu
      command: ["/bin/sh"]
      args: 
        - "-c"
        - "echo 'Hello from the container!' >> /data/$(date -u).txt; tail -f /dev/null"
      volumeMounts:
        - name: persistent-storage
          mountPath: /data
  volumes:
    - name: persistent-storage
      persistentVolumeClaim:
        claimName: s3-pvc
```

**Deploy and Verify:**

```bash
# Deploy the resources
kubectl apply -f static_provisioning.yaml

# Verify deployment
kubectl get pv,pvc,pods

# Check if file was created in S3
> aws s3 ls s3://mountpoint-s3-csi-driver-testing-bucket/some-s3-prefix/
2025-06-01 16:13:25         26 Sun Jun  1 21:13:24 UTC 2025.txt

# Cleanup
kubectl delete -f static_provisioning.yaml
```

![Static Provisioning Example](./img/s3-static_provisioning.png)

### Example 2: Multiple S3 Buckets in One Pod

This example shows how to mount multiple S3 buckets to a single pod:  
multiple_buckets_one_pod.yaml 

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolume
metadata:
  name: s3-pv-bucket1
spec:
  capacity:
    storage: 1200Gi
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteMany
  storageClassName: ""
  claimRef:
    namespace: default
    name: s3-pvc-bucket1
  mountOptions:
    - allow-delete
    - region us-west-2
  csi:
    driver: s3.csi.aws.com
    volumeHandle: s3-csi-driver-volume-1
    volumeAttributes:
      bucketName: mountpoint-s3-csi-driver-testing-bucket-1 # Replace with your bucket name
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: s3-pvc-bucket1
spec:
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteMany
  storageClassName: ""
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 1200Gi
  volumeName: s3-pv-bucket1
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolume
metadata:
  name: s3-pv-bucket2
spec:
  capacity:
    storage: 1200Gi
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteMany
  storageClassName: ""
  claimRef:
    namespace: default
    name: s3-pvc-bucket2
  mountOptions:
    - allow-delete
    - region us-west-2
  csi:
    driver: s3.csi.aws.com
    volumeHandle: s3-csi-driver-volume-2
    volumeAttributes:
      bucketName: mountpoint-s3-csi-driver-testing-bucket-2 # Replace with your bucket name
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: s3-pvc-bucket2
spec:
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteMany
  storageClassName: ""
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 1200Gi
  volumeName: s3-pv-bucket2
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: s3-multi-bucket-app
spec:
  containers:
    - name: app
      image: ubuntu
      command: ["/bin/sh"]
      args:
        - "-c"
        - |
          echo 'Data for bucket 1' >> /data1/$(date -u).txt
          echo 'Data for bucket 2' >> /data2/$(date -u).txt
          tail -f /dev/null
      volumeMounts:
        - name: storage-bucket1
          mountPath: /data1
        - name: storage-bucket2
          mountPath: /data2
  volumes:
    - name: storage-bucket1
      persistentVolumeClaim:
        claimName: s3-pvc-bucket1
    - name: storage-bucket2
      persistentVolumeClaim:
        claimName: s3-pvc-bucket2
```

#### Bucket 1 
![Multiple Buckets Example](./img/s3-multiple_buckets_one_pod1.png)
#### Bucket 2
![Multiple Buckets Example](./img/s3-multiple_buckets_one_pod2.png)

### Example 3: Shared Storage Across Multiple Pods

This example demonstrates multiple pods sharing the same S3 bucket:  
multiple_pods_one_bucket.yaml 
```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolume
metadata:
  name: s3-shared-pv
spec:
  capacity:
    storage: 1200Gi
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteMany
  storageClassName: ""
  claimRef:
    namespace: default
    name: s3-shared-pvc
  mountOptions:
    - allow-delete
    - region us-east-1
  csi:
    driver: s3.csi.aws.com
    volumeHandle: s3-shared-volume
    volumeAttributes:
      bucketName: mountpoint-s3-csi-driver-testing-bucket # Replace with your bucket name
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
metadata:
  name: s3-shared-pvc
spec:
  accessModes:
    - ReadWriteMany
  storageClassName: ""
  resources:
    requests:
      storage: 1200Gi
  volumeName: s3-shared-pv
---
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: s3-shared-app
  labels:
    app: s3-shared-app
spec:
  replicas: 3
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: s3-shared-app
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: s3-shared-app
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: s3-app
        image: ubuntu
        command: ["/bin/sh"]
        args:
          - "-c"
          - |
            POD_NAME=$(hostname)
            echo "Hello from pod $POD_NAME at $(date -u)" >> /data/$POD_NAME-$(date -u).txt
            tail -f /dev/null
        volumeMounts:
        - name: shared-storage
          mountPath: /data
        ports:
        - containerPort: 80
      volumes:
      - name: shared-storage
        persistentVolumeClaim:
          claimName: s3-shared-pvc
```

#### Shared Storage Across Multiple Pods Example
![Shared Storage Example](./img/s3-multiple_pods_one_bucket.png)


## Configuration Options and Mount Options

### Available Mount Options

- `allow-delete`: Allows deletion of objects
- `region <region>`: Specify AWS region
- `prefix <prefix>`: Mount only objects with specific prefix
- `uid <uid>`: Set file owner UID
- `gid <gid>`: Set file owner GID
- `allow-overwrite`: Allow overwriting existing files

### Performance Tuning

```yaml
mountOptions:
  - allow-delete
  - region us-west-2
  - prefix data/
  - cache /tmp/mountpoint-cache
  - max-threads 16
```

## Monitoring and Troubleshooting

### Common Commands for Troubleshooting

```bash
# Check driver status
kubectl get pods -n kube-system | grep s3-csi

# View driver logs
kubectl logs -n kube-system -l app=s3-csi-node

# Describe PV/PVC for issues
kubectl describe pv s3-pv
kubectl describe pvc s3-pvc

# Check mount status inside pod
kubectl exec -it <pod-name> -- df -h
kubectl exec -it <pod-name> -- mount | grep s3
```

### Common Issues and Solutions

1. **Permission Denied**: Verify IAM role has correct S3 permissions
2. **Mount Timeout**: Check region configuration and network connectivity
3. **Bucket Not Found**: Ensure bucket exists and is accessible from the cluster region

## Use Cases and Benefits

### Ideal Use Cases

- **Data Analytics**: Large-scale data processing workloads
- **Machine Learning**: Training data access and model storage
- **Content Distribution**: Serving static content from S3
- **Backup and Archive**: Application data backup to S3
- **Log Aggregation**: Centralized logging to S3

### Key Benefits

- **Cost Effective**: Leverage S3's cost-effective storage tiers
- **Scalability**: Virtually unlimited storage capacity
- **Durability**: 99.999999999% (11 9's) durability
- **Integration**: Native Kubernetes storage integration
- **Performance**: Optimized for high-throughput workloads

## Security Best Practices

### IAM Policy Recommendations

1. **Principle of Least Privilege**: Grant only necessary permissions
2. **Bucket-Specific Policies**: Limit access to specific buckets
3. **Regular Audits**: Review and rotate IAM roles periodically

### Network Security

```yaml
# Example network policy for pod-to-S3 communication
apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: NetworkPolicy
metadata:
  name: s3-app-network-policy
spec:
  podSelector:
    matchLabels:
      app: s3-app
  policyTypes:
  - Egress
  egress:
  - to: []
    ports:
    - protocol: TCP
      port: 443
```

## Advanced Configuration

### Custom Storage Classes

```yaml
apiVersion: storage.k8s.io/v1
kind: StorageClass
metadata:
  name: s3-csi-storage
provisioner: s3.csi.aws.com
parameters:
  bucketName: my-s3-bucket
  region: us-west-2
mountOptions:
  - allow-delete
  - cache /tmp/s3-cache
```

### Pod Security Context

```yaml
spec:
  securityContext:
    fsGroup: 2000
    runAsUser: 1000
    runAsGroup: 3000
  containers:
  - name: app
    securityContext:
      allowPrivilegeEscalation: false
      readOnlyRootFilesystem: true
```

## Cleanup and Maintenance

### Removing the Driver

```bash
# Remove the EKS add-on
aws eks delete-addon \
    --cluster-name $CLUSTER_NAME \
    --addon-name aws-mountpoint-s3-csi-driver

# Clean up IAM resources
eksctl delete iamserviceaccount \
    --name s3-csi-driver-sa \
    --namespace kube-system \
    --cluster $CLUSTER_NAME
```

### Maintenance Tasks

1. **Regular Updates**: Keep the driver updated to latest version
2. **Monitoring**: Monitor S3 costs and usage patterns
3. **Performance Review**: Regularly assess performance metrics
4. **Security Audits**: Review IAM permissions and access patterns

## Additional Resources

- [Mountpoint for Amazon S3 CSI Driver GitHub Repository](https://github.com/awslabs/mountpoint-s3-csi-driver)
- [Official AWS Documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/s3-csi.html)
- [Mountpoint for Amazon S3 Documentation](https://github.com/awslabs/mountpoint-s3)
- [Kubernetes CSI Documentation](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/)
- [AWS EKS Best Practices Guide](https://aws.github.io/aws-eks-best-practices/)

## Conclusion

The Mountpoint for Amazon S3 CSI driver provides a powerful solution for integrating S3 storage with Kubernetes workloads. By following this comprehensive guide, you can successfully implement, configure, and manage S3-backed persistent volumes in your EKS environment while maintaining security best practices and optimal performance.
