eks/fargate-based-cluster/README.MD, before:

# **Getting Started with AWS EKS Fargate: A Complete Guide to Serverless Kubernetes**  
## **"Deploy Serverless Containers on EKS with Fargate Profiles – Step-by-Step Tutorial"**  

---

### **Introduction**  
AWS Fargate eliminates the need to manage EC2 instances for Kubernetes workloads, allowing you to focus on applications instead of infrastructure. In this guide, you’ll learn to:  
1. Create an EKS cluster.  
2. Configure Fargate profiles to run serverless pods.  
3. Deploy and troubleshoot applications on Fargate.  

---

### **Prerequisites**  
1. **AWS CLI**: Installed and configured (`aws configure`).  
2. **kubectl**: Installed ([guide](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/)).  
3. **IAM Permissions**: Ability to create EKS clusters, IAM roles, and Fargate profiles.  

---

### **Step 1: Create IAM Roles**  
#### **1.1 EKS Cluster Role**  
Fargate requires the same cluster role as standard EKS.  

**a. Trust Policy (`cluster-trust-policy.json`)**  
```json
{
  "Version": "2012-10-17",
  "Statement": [
    {
      "Effect": "Allow",
      "Principal": { "Service": "eks.amazonaws.com" },
      "Action": "sts:AssumeRole"
    }
  ]
}
```  

**b. Create and Attach Policy**  
```bash
aws iam create-role \
  --role-name EKSFargateClusterRole \
  --assume-role-policy-document file://cluster-trust-policy.json

aws iam attach-role-policy \
  --role-name EKSFargateClusterRole \
  --policy-arn arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonEKSClusterPolicy
```  

#### **1.2 Fargate Execution Role**  
Pods running on Fargate need permissions to pull images and write logs.  

**a. Trust Policy (`fargate-trust-policy.json`)**  
```json
{
  "Version": "2012-10-17",
  "Statement": [
    {
      "Effect": "Allow",
      "Principal": { "Service": "eks-fargate-pods.amazonaws.com" },
      "Action": "sts:AssumeRole"
    }
  ]
}
```  

**b. Create and Attach Policies**  
```bash
aws iam create-role \
  --role-name EKSFargatePodExecutionRole \
  --assume-role-policy-document file://fargate-trust-policy.json

aws iam attach-role-policy \
  --role-name EKSFargatePodExecutionRole \
  --policy-arn arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonEKSFargatePodExecutionRolePolicy

aws iam attach-role-policy \
  --role-name EKSFargatePodExecutionRole \
  --policy-arn arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonEC2ContainerRegistryReadOnly
```  

---

### **Step 2: Create the EKS Cluster**  
```bash
aws eks create-cluster \
  --name FargateEKSClusterDemo \
  --role-arn arn:aws:iam::<ACCOUNT_ID>:role/EKSFargateClusterRole \
  --resources-vpc-config subnetIds=subnet-12345678,subnet-87654321
```  

**Wait for cluster activation** (10–15 minutes):  
```bash
aws eks describe-cluster --name FargateEKSClusterDemo --query "cluster.status"
```  

---

### **Step 3: Configure kubectl**  
```bash
aws eks update-kubeconfig --name FargateEKSClusterDemo --region us-east-1
```  

---

### **Step 4: Create a Fargate Profile**  
Fargate profiles define which pods run on Fargate based on namespaces and labels.  
The following create-fargate-profile example creates an EKS Fargate Profile for a selector with a namespace.  

  ```bash
  # General Command
  aws eks create-fargate-profile \
    --cluster-name <cluster-name> \
    --fargate-profile-name demo-fargate-profile \
    --pod-execution-role-arn arn:aws:iam::<ACCOUNT_ID>:role/EKSFargatePodExecutionRole \
    --subnets subnet-12345678 subnet-87654321 \ # Make sure the subnets are private
    --selectors '{"namespace": "<namespace-name>"}'  # Target pods in this namespace
  
  # Example
  aws eks create-fargate-profile \
    --cluster-name FargateEKSClusterDemo \
    --fargate-profile-name demo-fargate-profile \
    --pod-execution-role-arn arn:aws:iam::463470985368:role/EKSFargatePodExecutionRole \
    --subnets subnet-0306cf3e80e146e92 \
    --selectors '[{"namespace": "fargate-ns"},{"namespace": "kube-system"}]'  # Target pods in this namespace
  
  ```  

**Key Parameters**:  
- `--selectors`: Specify namespaces or labels to schedule pods on Fargate.  
- `--subnets`: Use private subnets for fargate workloads.  

**Wait for profile activation** (2–5 minutes):  
```bash
aws eks describe-fargate-profile \
  --cluster-name FargateEKSClusterDemo \
  --fargate-profile-name my-fargate-profile \
  --query "fargateProfile.status"
```  

---

### **Step 5: Deploy a Sample Application**  
#### **5.1 Create a Namespace**  
```bash
kubectl create ns fargate-ns  # Must match the Fargate profile selector
```  

#### **5.2 Deploy an Nginx Pod**  
```yaml
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: nginx
  namespace: fargate-ns
spec:
  replicas: 2
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: nginx
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: nginx
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: nginx
        image: nginx:latest
        ports:
        - containerPort: 80
EOF
```  

#### **5.3 Verify Pods Are Running on Fargate**  
```bash
kubectl get pods -n fargate-ns -o wide
```  
*Output*:  
```
NAME                    READY   STATUS    IP              NODE                                       AGE
nginx-abcde            1/1     Running   192.168.1.100   fargate-ip-192-168-1-100.ec2.internal     1m
```  

---

### **Troubleshooting Fargate Issues**  
#### **1. Pods Stuck in `Pending` State**  
- **Check Fargate Profile Status**:  
  ```bash
  aws eks describe-fargate-profile --cluster-name FargateEKSClusterDemo --fargate-profile-name my-fargate-profile
  ```  
  Ensure the profile is `ACTIVE`.  

- **Verify Namespace Selectors**: The pod’s namespace must match the Fargate profile selector.  

#### **2. Permission Errors**  
- **Pod Execution Role**: Ensure the role has `AmazonEKSFargatePodExecutionRolePolicy` and `AmazonEC2ContainerRegistryReadOnly`.  
  ```bash
  aws iam list-attached-role-policies --role-name EKSFargatePodExecutionRole
  ```  

#### **3. Networking Issues**  
- **Subnet Tags**: Ensure subnets are tagged for EKS:  
  ```bash
  aws ec2 create-tags --resources subnet-12345678 --tags Key=kubernetes.io/cluster/FargateEKSClusterDemo,Value=shared
  ```  

---

### **Cleanup**  
1. **Delete the Fargate Profile**:  
   ```bash
   aws eks delete-fargate-profile \
     --cluster-name FargateEKSClusterDemo \
     --fargate-profile-name my-fargate-profile
   ```  

2. **Delete the EKS Cluster**:  
   ```bash
   aws eks delete-cluster --name FargateEKSClusterDemo
   ```  

3. **Delete IAM Roles**:  
   ```bash
   aws iam delete-role --role-name EKSFargateClusterRole
   aws iam delete-role --role-name EKSFargatePodExecutionRole
   ```  

---

### **Best Practices for EKS Fargate**  
1. **Namespace Strategy**: Use dedicated namespaces (e.g., `prod-fargate`, `dev-fargate`) to isolate workloads.  
2. **Cost Optimization**:  
   - Use **Spot** capacity for non-critical workloads (Fargate Spot).  
   - Monitor costs with AWS Cost Explorer.  
3. **Logging**: Integrate with AWS CloudWatch for centralized logging.  
4. **Security**:  
   - Restrict pod execution roles using IAM policies.  
   - Use private subnets for internal workloads.  

---

### **Fargate vs. Managed Node Groups**  
| **Feature**               | **Fargate**                          | **Managed Node Groups**            |  
|---------------------------|---------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|  
| **Infrastructure**         | Serverless (no nodes to manage)       | EC2 instances managed by AWS        |  
| **Pricing**                | Per vCPU/memory/hour                  | Per EC2 instance + EKS fee          |  
| **Use Cases**              | Microservices, batch jobs             | Stateful apps, GPU workloads        |  
| **Scaling**                | Automatic (per pod)                   | Managed by Cluster Autoscaler       |  

---

### **Conclusion**  
AWS EKS Fargate simplifies Kubernetes by abstracting infrastructure management. By following this guide, you’ve learned to:  
- Deploy a serverless EKS cluster.  
- Schedule pods on Fargate using profiles.  
- Troubleshoot common issues like pending pods.  

**Next Steps**:  
- Explore [Fargate Spot](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/fargate-spot.html) for cost savings.  
- Set up [AWS App Mesh](https://aws.amazon.com/app-mesh/) for service mesh on Fargate.  

Need help? Ask in the comments! 🚀  

--- 

**Additional Resources**:  
- [AWS EKS Fargate Documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/fargate.html)  
- [Fargate Pricing Calculator](https://aws.amazon.com/fargate/pricing/)  
- [EKS Security Best Practices](https://aws.github.io/aws-eks-best-practices/)

Commit message:

Update A Hands-On Guide to AWS EKS Fargate Cluster

eks/fargate-based-cluster/README.MD, after:

# **⎈ A Hands-On Guide to AWS EKS Fargate Cluster 🛠️**  
## **"Deploy Serverless Containers on EKS with Fargate Profiles – Step-by-Step Tutorial"**  

Medium Blog Link: [⎈ Hands-On Guide to Creating an Amazon EKS Cluster with Self-Managed Worker Nodes ⎈](https://medium.com/@muppedaanvesh/hands-on-guide-to-creating-an-amazon-eks-cluster-with-self-managed-worker-nodes-fad026c34482)

![EKS Fargate Cluster](./eks.fargateManaged.png)  

---

### **Introduction**  
AWS Fargate eliminates the need to manage EC2 instances for Kubernetes workloads, allowing you to focus on applications instead of infrastructure. In this guide, you’ll learn to:  
1. Create an EKS cluster.  
2. Configure Fargate profiles to run serverless pods.  
3. Deploy and troubleshoot applications on Fargate.  

---

### **Prerequisites**  
1. **AWS CLI**: Installed and configured (`aws configure`).  
2. **kubectl**: Installed ([guide](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/)).  
3. **IAM Permissions**: Ability to create EKS clusters, IAM roles, and Fargate profiles.  

---

### **Step 1: Create IAM Roles**  
#### **1.1 EKS Cluster Role**  
Fargate requires the same cluster role as standard EKS.  

**a. Trust Policy (`cluster-trust-policy.json`)**  
```json
{
  "Version": "2012-10-17",
  "Statement": [
    {
      "Effect": "Allow",
      "Principal": { "Service": "eks.amazonaws.com" },
      "Action": "sts:AssumeRole"
    }
  ]
}
```  

**b. Create and Attach Policy**  
```bash
aws iam create-role \
  --role-name EKSFargateClusterRole \
  --assume-role-policy-document file://cluster-trust-policy.json

aws iam attach-role-policy \
  --role-name EKSFargateClusterRole \
  --policy-arn arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonEKSClusterPolicy
```  

#### **1.2 Fargate Execution Role**  
Pods running on Fargate need permissions to pull images and write logs.  

**a. Trust Policy (`fargate-trust-policy.json`)**  
```json
{
  "Version": "2012-10-17",
  "Statement": [
    {
      "Effect": "Allow",
      "Principal": { "Service": "eks-fargate-pods.amazonaws.com" },
      "Action": "sts:AssumeRole"
    }
  ]
}
```  

**b. Create and Attach Policies**  
```bash
aws iam create-role \
  --role-name EKSFargatePodExecutionRole \
  --assume-role-policy-document file://fargate-trust-policy.json

aws iam attach-role-policy \
  --role-name EKSFargatePodExecutionRole \
  --policy-arn arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonEKSFargatePodExecutionRolePolicy

aws iam attach-role-policy \
  --role-name EKSFargatePodExecutionRole \
  --policy-arn arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonEC2ContainerRegistryReadOnly
```  

---

### **Step 2: Create the EKS Cluster**  
```bash
aws eks create-cluster \
  --name FargateEKSClusterDemo \
  --role-arn arn:aws:iam::<ACCOUNT_ID>:role/EKSFargateClusterRole \
  --resources-vpc-config subnetIds=subnet-12345678,subnet-87654321
```  

**Wait for cluster activation** (10–15 minutes):  
```bash
aws eks describe-cluster --name FargateEKSClusterDemo --query "cluster.status"
```  

---

### **Step 3: Configure kubectl**  
```bash
aws eks update-kubeconfig --name FargateEKSClusterDemo --region us-east-1
```  

---

### **Step 4: Create a Fargate Profile**  
Fargate profiles define which pods run on Fargate based on namespaces and labels.  
The following create-fargate-profile example creates an EKS Fargate Profile for a selector with a namespace.  

  ```bash
  # General Command
  aws eks create-fargate-profile \
    --cluster-name <cluster-name> \
    --fargate-profile-name demo-fargate-profile \
    --pod-execution-role-arn arn:aws:iam::<ACCOUNT_ID>:role/EKSFargatePodExecutionRole \
    --subnets subnet-12345678 subnet-87654321 \ # Make sure the subnets are private
    --selectors '{"namespace": "<namespace-name>"}'  # Target pods in this namespace
  
  # Example
  aws eks create-fargate-profile \
    --cluster-name FargateEKSClusterDemo \
    --fargate-profile-name demo-fargate-profile \
    --pod-execution-role-arn arn:aws:iam::463470985368:role/EKSFargatePodExecutionRole \
    --subnets subnet-0306cf3e80e146e92 \
    --selectors '[{"namespace": "fargate-ns"},{"namespace": "kube-system"}]'  # Target pods in this namespace
  
  ```  

**Key Parameters**:  
- `--selectors`: Specify namespaces or labels to schedule pods on Fargate.  
- `--subnets`: Use private subnets for fargate workloads.  

**Wait for profile activation** (2–5 minutes):  
```bash
aws eks describe-fargate-profile \
  --cluster-name FargateEKSClusterDemo \
  --fargate-profile-name my-fargate-profile \
  --query "fargateProfile.status"
```  

---

### **Step 5: Deploy a Sample Application**  
#### **5.1 Create a Namespace**  
```bash
kubectl create ns fargate-ns  # Must match the Fargate profile selector
```  

#### **5.2 Deploy an Nginx Pod**  
```yaml
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: nginx
  namespace: fargate-ns
spec:
  replicas: 2
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: nginx
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: nginx
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: nginx
        image: nginx:latest
        ports:
        - containerPort: 80
EOF
```  

#### **5.3 Verify Pods Are Running on Fargate**  
```bash
kubectl get pods -n fargate-ns -o wide
```  
*Output*:  
```
NAME                    READY   STATUS    IP              NODE                                       AGE
nginx-abcde            1/1     Running   192.168.1.100   fargate-ip-192-168-1-100.ec2.internal     1m
```  

---

### **Troubleshooting Fargate Issues**  
#### **1. Pods Stuck in `Pending` State**  
- **Check Fargate Profile Status**:  
  ```bash
  aws eks describe-fargate-profile --cluster-name FargateEKSClusterDemo --fargate-profile-name my-fargate-profile
  ```  
  Ensure the profile is `ACTIVE`.  

- **Verify Namespace Selectors**: The pod’s namespace must match the Fargate profile selector.  

#### **2. Permission Errors**  
- **Pod Execution Role**: Ensure the role has `AmazonEKSFargatePodExecutionRolePolicy` and `AmazonEC2ContainerRegistryReadOnly`.  
  ```bash
  aws iam list-attached-role-policies --role-name EKSFargatePodExecutionRole
  ```  

#### **3. Networking Issues**  
- **Subnet Tags**: Ensure subnets are tagged for EKS:  
  ```bash
  aws ec2 create-tags --resources subnet-12345678 --tags Key=kubernetes.io/cluster/FargateEKSClusterDemo,Value=shared
  ```  

---

### **Cleanup**  
1. **Delete the Fargate Profile**:  
   ```bash
   aws eks delete-fargate-profile \
     --cluster-name FargateEKSClusterDemo \
     --fargate-profile-name my-fargate-profile
   ```  

2. **Delete the EKS Cluster**:  
   ```bash
   aws eks delete-cluster --name FargateEKSClusterDemo
   ```  

3. **Delete IAM Roles**:  
   ```bash
   aws iam delete-role --role-name EKSFargateClusterRole
   aws iam delete-role --role-name EKSFargatePodExecutionRole
   ```  

---

### **Best Practices for EKS Fargate**  
1. **Namespace Strategy**: Use dedicated namespaces (e.g., `prod-fargate`, `dev-fargate`) to isolate workloads.  
2. **Cost Optimization**:  
   - Use **Spot** capacity for non-critical workloads (Fargate Spot).  
   - Monitor costs with AWS Cost Explorer.  
3. **Logging**: Integrate with AWS CloudWatch for centralized logging.  
4. **Security**:  
   - Restrict pod execution roles using IAM policies.  
   - Use private subnets for internal workloads.  

---

### **Fargate vs. Managed Node Groups**  
| **Feature**               | **Fargate**                          | **Managed Node Groups**            |  
|---------------------------|---------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|  
| **Infrastructure**         | Serverless (no nodes to manage)       | EC2 instances managed by AWS        |  
| **Pricing**                | Per vCPU/memory/hour                  | Per EC2 instance + EKS fee          |  
| **Use Cases**              | Microservices, batch jobs             | Stateful apps, GPU workloads        |  
| **Scaling**                | Automatic (per pod)                   | Managed by Cluster Autoscaler       |  

---

### **Conclusion**  
AWS EKS Fargate simplifies Kubernetes by abstracting infrastructure management. By following this guide, you’ve learned to:  
- Deploy a serverless EKS cluster.  
- Schedule pods on Fargate using profiles.  
- Troubleshoot common issues like pending pods.  

**Next Steps**:  
- Explore [Fargate Spot](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/fargate-spot.html) for cost savings.  
- Set up [AWS App Mesh](https://aws.amazon.com/app-mesh/) for service mesh on Fargate.  

Need help? Ask in the comments! 🚀  

--- 

**Additional Resources**:  
- [AWS EKS Fargate Documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/fargate.html)  
- [Fargate Pricing Calculator](https://aws.amazon.com/fargate/pricing/)  
- [EKS Security Best Practices](https://aws.github.io/aws-eks-best-practices/)
